Bowel Wars: Hydrogen Sulfide vs. Butyrate
There's a take-off of the industry slogan
"Beef: It's What's For Dinner" ---
"Beef: It's What's Rotting in Your Colon."
I saw this on a shirt
once with some friends
and I was such the party pooper
-- no pun intended --
explaining to everyone how meat
is fully digested in
the small intestine,
and never makes it
down into the colon.
No fun hanging out with biology
geeks --- but I was wrong!
It's been estimated that
with a typical Western diet,
up to 12 grams of protein
per day can escape digestion,
and when it reaches the colon
it can be turned into toxic
substances like ammonia.
This degradation of undigested protein
in the colon is called putrefaction,
so a little meat can actually
end up putrefying in our colon.
The problem is that some of the by-products
of this putrefaction can be toxic.
It's generally accepted that
carbohydrate fermentation
- the fiber and resistant starches
that reach our colon -
results in beneficial
effects for the host
because of the generation of short
chain fatty acids like butyrate,
whereas protein fermentation
is considered detrimental for us.
Protein fermentation mainly
occurs in the lower end of colon,
when carbohydrates get depleted
and results in the production
of potentially toxic metabolites.
Perhaps that's why we
see more colorectal cancer
and ulcerative colitis
lower down,
because that's where
the protein is putrefying.
The most simple strategy
to reduce the degree
of potentially harmful compounds
by protein fermentation
is probably a reduction
in dietary protein intake.
But the accumulation of these harmful
by-products of protein metabolism
may be attenuated by the fermentation
of undigested plant matter.
This study showed that if you give people
foods containing resistant starch
-- that means starch resistant
to small intestine digestion
so it can feed our good
bacteria down in our colon;
foods such as cooked beans, peas,
lentils, raw oatmeal, cold pasta --
you can block the accumulation
of these potentially
harmful byproducts
of protein metabolism.
The more starch ending up in the
stool, the less ammonia, for example.
But there's protein in plants, too.
The difference is that
animal proteins tend to have
more sulfur-containing amino acids
like methionine that can be turned
into hydrogen sulfide in our colon,
the rotten egg gas that may
play a role in the development
of the inflammatory bowel diseases
like ulcerative colitis
as I've covered previously.
The toxic effects of hydrogen
sulfide appear to be mediated
through blocking the ability
of our colon cells to utilize butyrate,
which is what our good bacteria
make from the fiber we eat.
So it's like this constant
battle in our colon
between the bad metabolites
of protein, hydrogen sulfide,
and the good metabolites
of carbohydrates, butyrate.
Using human colon samples
they were able to show
that the adverse effects of sulfide
could be reversed by butyrate.
So we can either cut down on
meat, eat more plants, or both.
But there's two ways hydrogen
sulfide can be produced.
Though it's mainly present
in our large intestine
as a result of the breakdown
of these sulfur-containing proteins,
rotten egg gas can also be generated
from inorganic sulfur preservatives
like sulfites and sulfur dioxide.
Sulfur dioxide is used
as a preservative in dried fruit,
and sulfites are added to wine.
We can avoid sulfur additives by reading
labels or by just choosing organic,
since by law they're forbidden
from organic fruits and beverages.
Now cabbage family vegetables
naturally have some sulfur compounds,
but thankfully, after following more
than a 100,000 women for over 25 years,
cruciferous vegetables were NOT
associated with elevated colitis risk.
But because of the animal protein
and preservative laden processed foods,
the standard American diet may
have five or six times more sulfur
than a diet centered around
unprocessed plant foods,
which may help explain the rarity
of inflammatory bowel disease
among those eating traditional
whole food plant-based diets.